docs: documents chat message replies (#1587)
knocklabs/docs: content/designing-workflows/replying-to-chat-messages.mdx

---
title: Replying to chat messages
description: Learn how to reply to messages created by an earlier workflow step or in an existing thread.
tags: ["steps", "channels", "chat", "slack", "discord"]

> section: Designing workflows

Reviewer: Will need to be updated if we move

---

> Chat channel steps can start a new conversation or reply in an existing provider thread. When the parent message was created by the same workflow run, reply to the previous Knock step. When the parent message already exists outside the workflow, provide its message ID instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chat channel steps can start a new conversation or reply to an existing provider thread. When a parent message was created by the current workflow run, you can send a reply to a previous chat step. To reply to a message that already exists outside the workflow run, you'll provide its message ID instead.
```

<Callout
  type="info"

>   title="Slack and Discord support"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title="Supported providers."
```
Just a note that if the copy change isn't accepted, we do need to at a minimum add a `.` for style guide compliance.

  text="Chat replies are available for Slack and Discord channel steps that use a bot-based connection. Incoming webhook connections do not support replies."
/>

## Reply to a previous Knock step

> This is the recommended way to create a reply. Knock uses the earlier step's provider message reference and destination, so you do not need to pass provider IDs or configure the destination again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the recommended way to create a reply. Knock uses the earlier workflow step's provider message reference and destination, so you do not need to pass provider IDs or configure the destination again.
```

In the workflow builder:

1. Add a chat channel step after the step that creates the parent message.
2. Set **Message behavior** to **Reply to a previous Knock step**.
3. Select the **Parent step**.

A step is available as a parent when it:

> - Is a previous chat channel step that is reachable on every execution path to the reply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Is a previous chat channel step that is reachable on every execution path to the reply. Chat steps inside conditional [branches](/designing-workflows/branch-function) will not be eligible as a parent to subsequent steps outside of that branch.
```

- Uses the same single Knock channel as the reply step. Channel groups are not supported.

> - Resolves to one provider message and destination for the recipient workflow run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Resolves to one provider message and destination for the current recipient workflow run.
```
Question: what does this exclude? Something like a previous chat step that sends multiple messages because the recipient's channel data is an array of channel connections? Should we say that explicitly?

The reply step inherits the exact provider message reference and recipient connection from its parent. If the parent message is queued or scheduled, Knock waits for its provider message reference before attempting the reply.

## Reply to an existing thread

> Use this option when the parent message already exists outside the current workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this option when the parent message already exists outside of the current workflow run.
```

In the workflow builder:

1. Set **Message behavior** to **Reply to an existing thread**.

> 2. Enter the **Parent message ID**, usually as a Liquid value from your workflow data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Enter the **Parent message ID**, usually as a dynamic Liquid reference from your workflow trigger `data`.
```

> 3. For Slack, optionally enter the channel ID in **Send to**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. For Slack, optionally enter the channel ID in **Send to**. Required if the parent message did not originate in Knock. The value must match the channel ID of the parent.
```
This is required if the parent message was not generated through Knock, correct? What are the scenarios where this wouldn't be necessary? Feel free to tweak suggested language, this is based on my understanding.

Reviewer: Ah ok, I see this is covered below. So maybe instead....

```suggestion
3. For Slack, optionally enter the channel ID in **Send to**. See below for more detail on [configuring the destination](#configure-the-destination).
```

Just whatever we can do to mitigate potential confusion about why this is optional and point people to the answer

The value expected for **Parent message ID** depends on the provider:

> - For Slack, use the parent message timestamp (`ts`). Knock sends it to Slack as `thread_ts`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For Slack, use the parent message's timestamp (`ts`). Knock sends it to Slack as `thread_ts`.
```

Reviewer: I think we should also note that for a Slack message that was generated by Knock, this `ts` is the same value as the `metadata.external_id` that we return via API/webhooks for that message. We could mention that here, or maybe in a callout on the example below? I think it's a useful implementation pattern to call out

Reviewer: (and I guess the same bot token caveat applies for that use case and should potentially be noted but maybe the mention above covers that well enough already)

- For Discord, use the parent Discord message ID.

### Configure the destination

> For Slack, **Send to** accepts a Slack channel ID, usually from workflow data such as `{{ data.channel_id }}`. Leave it blank to use the recipient's Slack channel connection. In either case, the destination must be the channel that contains the parent message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Slack, **Send to** accepts a Slack channel ID, usually from workflow trigger data such as `{{ data.channel_id }}`. Leave it blank to use the recipient's Slack channel connection. In either case, the destination must be the channel that contains the parent message.
```

For Discord, Knock uses the Discord channel data stored on the recipient. That connection must identify the channel that contains the parent message.

The configured Slack or Discord channel supplies authentication. Do not put a bot token in workflow data or in the destination field.

> ### Slack trigger-data example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Slack trigger data example
```

Send the Slack message timestamp and channel ID in the workflow trigger data:

> ```javascript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```javascript title="Triggering a threaded Slack response"
```
nit: should include a `title` of some sort

await knock.workflows.trigger("reply-to-slack-message", {
  recipients: ["user_123"],
  data: {
    parent_message_id: "1784920923.818589",
    channel_id: "C0123456789",
  },
});
```

Then configure the Slack step with:

| Setting           | Value                          |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------ |
| Message behavior  | Reply to an existing thread    |
| Parent message ID | `{{ data.parent_message_id }}` |
| Send to           | `{{ data.channel_id }}`        |

At execution time, Knock renders the destination as a recipient connection equivalent to:

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```json title="A recipient Slack connection"
```
Same nit as above

{
  "channel_id": "C0123456789"
}
```

## Troubleshooting

| Problem                                                                        | What happens                                                                                            | How to fix it                                                                 |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| The Slack timestamp is correct, but **Send to** is blank                       | Knock uses the recipient's stored Slack connection, which might point to another channel.               | Enter the channel ID that contains the parent message.                        |

> | The Slack timestamp and channel ID refer to different channels                 | The reply does not attach to the expected thread, or Slack rejects the request.                         | Enter the channel that contains the parent message.                           |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The Slack timestamp and channel ID refer to different channels                 | The reply does not attach to the expected thread, or Slack rejects the request.                         | Enter the channel ID that contains the parent message.                           |
```
For consistency

| The recipient uses an incoming webhook connection                              | Knock cannot reply because incoming webhooks do not provide the required bot-based connection.          | Configure channel data that uses a bot token and channel ID.                  |

> | A Liquid value is empty or malformed                                           | Knock cannot render a valid parent message ID or destination.                                           | Verify the workflow trigger data and Liquid path.                             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| A Liquid value is empty or malformed                                           | Knock cannot render a valid parent message ID or destination, so no reply is sent.                                           | Verify the workflow trigger data and Liquid path.                             |
```
